Provide best practices for managing protobuf definitions for PyAnsys client libraries (#203)
pyansys/dev-guide: doc/source/how-to/manage-protobuf-definitions.rst

Manage Protobuf definitions
===========================

Protobuf service definitions provide the API specification for underlying

> server implementations, so that each consuming client library has a clear

Reviewer: ```suggestion
server implementations so that each consuming client library has a clear
```

> contract for gRPC data messages. Ideally, the .proto files have a single

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
contract for gRPC data messages. Ideally, the ``.proto`` files have a single
```

> repository established as the source of truth for the .proto files,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
repository established as the source of truth for the ``.proto`` files,
```

Reviewer: Would this sentence be better written as follows:

Ideally, a single repository is established as the source of truth for the PROTO files.

Reviewer 2: Better naming them as ``.proto``

> organized by API version increment as the API definition expands and changes.
> Since most client libraries are custom implementations enhancing the developer
> experience when consuming the service, releasing the Protobuf definitions
> publicly gives full flexibility to the developer to operate at the abstraction
> layer they choose to do so.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
organized by API version increment as the API definition expands and changes.
Because most client libraries are custom implementations enhancing the developer
experience when consuming the service, releasing the Protobuf definitions
publicly gives full flexibility to developers to operate at the abstraction
layer they choose.
```

Maintain API definition repository
----------------------------------

> The Protobuf definition of the service is language agnostic, so the repository
> containing the Protobuf files can be created within the top-level Ansys

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Because the Protobuf definition of the service is language agnostic, the repository
containing the Protobuf files can be created within the top-level Ansys
```

GitHub organization. Every update of the Protobuf files follows a standard
pull request process as a sanity-check for API definition accuracy. Language
specific packages can be generated for each merge or on a set cadence.

Managing Protobuf definitions for Python clients
------------------------------------------------

Building Python stub classes
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> Add a python project definition to the API repository that can be utilized

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Add a Python project definition to the API repository that can be utilized
```

within the CI/CD build pipeline.

> A common tool to help build python stub classes is available and maintained

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A common tool to help build Python stub classes is available and maintained
```

within Ansys:

`ansys-tools-protoc-helper <https://github.com/ansys/ansys-tools-protoc-helper/>`_

> Example inclusion within pyproject.toml build dependency configuration:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Example inclusion within ``pyproject.toml`` build dependency configuration:
```

.. code-block:: toml

    [build-system]
    requires = ["setuptools >= 42.0.0", "wheel", "ansys_tools_protoc_helper"]

> 

Reviewer 3: The projects I've seen all have a setup.py file that either supersedes or works in conjunction with pyproject.toml. The template https://github.com/ansys/ansys-api-template creates setup.py. I inadvertently found out that Python 3.11 no longer supports setup.py (or strongly discourages its use). At some point pyproject.toml will need to be much more robust. Rather than including the example here, you might just refer folks to https://github.com/ansys/ansys-api-template, which, I assume, will be updated when setup.py is no longer used.

Reviewer 4: In the `ansys-api-template`, the use of `setup.py` [1] is unavoidable. The reason is that the way we generate the `.py` files from `.proto` ties into the steps of the `setuptools` - based build. In a sense, this is similar to having compiled code in your package, where you also need control over how that compilation is done. More details here: https://github.com/ansys/ansys-tools-protoc-helper#manual-use

Can you elaborate on how Python 3.11 no longer supports `setup.py`? As far as I'm aware, there's still a rather large number of projects doing setuptools-based builds. Most notably, numpy: https://github.com/numpy/numpy/blob/main/setup.py

[1] or alternatively, `setup.cfg`; in any case, it needs to be a setuptools-based build.

Reviewer 3: @greschd I saw errors like the following.
```
2022-10-26T17:34:13.4966702Z Installing collected packages: six, protobuf, numpy, grpcio, grpcio-tools
2022-10-26T17:34:16.1597729Z   DEPRECATION: grpcio is being installed using the legacy 'setup.py install' method, because it does not have a 'pyproject.toml' and the 'wheel' package is not installed. pip 23.1 will enforce this behaviour change. A possible replacement is to enable the '--use-pep517' option. Discussion can be found at https://github.com/pypa/pip/issues/8559
2022-10-26T17:34:16.1599084Z   Running setup.py install for grpcio: started
2022-10-26T17:35:16.2974285Z   Running setup.py install for grpcio: still running...
2022-10-26T17:36:16.3927973Z   Running setup.py install for grpcio: still running...
2022-10-26T17:37:10.8230847Z   Running setup.py install for grpcio: finished with status 'error'
2022-10-26T17:37:11.2571113Z   error: subprocess-exited-with-error
```

This could very well be a misunderstanding on my part. It could just be the result of `grpcio` and other libraries, like `numpy`, not having a wheel available for 3.11.

Reviewer 4: That seems mostly because 3.11 is new, and those projects might not have had a release including pre-built wheels for 3.11 yet. [1] 

Typically one can still build from the source distribution (sdist), but that may fail due e.g. to missing compilers, or other missing built-time dependencies.

Once a wheel is created, as far as I know the "build backend" (setuptools, flit, poetry) is no longer involved; the package has been baked into a standardized format.

[1] For `numpy`, the first release with 3.11 wheels appears to be `1.23.2` (look for `*cp311_*.whl` in [this list](https://pypi.org/project/numpy/1.23.2/#files)). For `grpcio`, it's [`1.49.1`](https://pypi.org/project/grpcio/1.49.1/#files).

Basic python project build step that can be executed locally or within a
build pipeline:

.. code-block:: python

    pip install -U pip
    pip install build
    python -m build

Publishing Python API package
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

PyPI is the common package manager where API packages are released.

> Example nightly build pipeline publishing the python stub package:

Reviewer 3: I'd include the contents of `.github/workflows/ci.yml` rather than the nightly build action. All projects will need something like ci.yml but not necessarily a nightly build.

> Example nightly build pipeline publishing the python stub package:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Here is an example of a nightly build pipeline publishing the Python stub package:
```

Reviewer: We want to use complete sentences for doc that is readable and easier to comprehend.

.. code-block:: yml

    name: Nightly dev release
  
    on:
      schedule: # UTC at 0300
        - cron: "0 5 * * *"
      workflow_dispatch:
          
    env:
      MAIN_PYTHON_VERSION: '3.10'
    
    jobs:
    nightly-release:
        name: Nightly release package
        if: github.ref == 'refs/heads/main'
        runs-on: ubuntu-latest
        steps:
        - uses: actions/checkout@v3
    
        - name: Append date to version tags
            run: |
            PACKAGE_DATE=$(date +'%Y%m%d%H%M')
            sed -i "1s/.$/$PACKAGE_DATE/" ansys/api/<api-name>/VERSION
        - name: Set up Python
            uses: actions/setup-python@v4
            with:
            python-version: ${{ env.MAIN_PYTHON_VERSION }}
    
        - name: Install build requirements
            run: |
            pip install -U pip
            pip install build
        - name: Build
            run: python -m build
    
        - name: Install
            run: pip install dist/*.whl
    
        - name: Test import
            run: |
            mkdir tmp
            cd tmp
            python -c "import ansys.api.<api-name>.v0; print('Successfully imported ansys.api.<api-name>.v0')"

>             python -c "from ansys.api.<api-name> import __version__; print(__version__)"
>         - name: Upload to PyPI

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
            python -c "from ansys.api.<api-name> import __version__; print(__version__)"

        - name: Upload to PyPI
```

            run: |
            pip install twine
            twine upload --skip-existing ./**/*.whl
            twine upload --skip-existing ./**/*.tar.gz
            env:
            TWINE_USERNAME: PAT
            TWINE_PASSWORD: ${{ secrets.PYANSYS_PyPI_PAT }} 
            TWINE_REPOSITORY_URL: https://pkgs.dev.azure.com/pyansys/_packaging/pyansys/PyPI/upload
    
        - name: Upload packages
            uses: actions/upload-artifact@v3
            with:
            name: ansys-api-<api-name>-packages
            path: dist/
            retention-days: 7

> PyPI packages follow semantic versioning while gRPC Protobuf API versions typically follow a simplified v*

Reviewer 2: Yes! :)

> versioning pattern. It is not expected to synchronize PyPI package version with Protobuf API version.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
versioning pattern. It is not expected to synchronize the PyPI package version with the Protobuf API version.
```

> There is no methodology to correlate PyPI package version with exposed gRPC API versions included within

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There is no methodology to correlate the PyPI package version with exposed gRPC API versions included within
```

the package.

Consuming the API package within Python
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Once the API package has been published to PyPI, a reference can be included within
the client library build dependencies.

> Example poetry configuration:

Reviewer: Here--because there are two examples, I'd recommend removing the colon and formatting them in bold like this:

**Example ``poetry`` configuration**

.. code-block:: toml

    [tool.poetry.dependencies]
    python = ">=3.7,<4.0"
    ansys-api-<api-name> = {version = "==*.*.*", source = "PyPI"}

The stub imports follow a standard pattern. For each API service, there is a ***_pb2

> module which defines all of the messages defined within that specific service file and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
module that defines all messages within a specific service file and
```

> a ***_pb2_grpc module that defines a Stub class that encapsulates all service methods.

Reviewer: Not sure why this format is used:  ***_pb2_grpc.

Reviewer 2: Adapted!

> a ***_pb2_grpc module that defines a Stub class that encapsulates all service methods.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
a ***_pb2_grpc module that defines a ``Stub`` class that encapsulates all service methods.
```

Example grpc imports within the wrapping client library:

.. code-block:: python

    from ansys.api.geometry.v0.designs_pb2 import (
        ExportDesignRequest,
        NewDesignRequest,
        SaveAsDocumentRequest,
    )
    from ansys.api.geometry.v0.designs_pb2_grpc import DesignsStub

> The best practice is to create a pythonic client library that organizes the service methods

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The best practice is to create a Pythonic client library that organizes the service methods
```

> in a very user-friendly manner and at a minimum acts as a facade layer wrapping the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
in a user-friendly manner. At a minimum, this library should act as a facade layer wrapping the
```

service calls so that the pythonic API can have a consistent abstraction, independent of
underlying implementations.

> For each client library release, only a single gRPC API version should be wrapped in order

Reviewer 3: Not sure I understand this. Are you talking about when a library has v0 and v1 only including one or the other in a release, or are you talking about something else? Maybe add an example?

Reviewer: If this sentence remains, remove "in order to" as these are unnecessary (meaningless) words.
